---
title: 'Covid restriction in China and social movement?" (Unfinished)'
date: 2022-11-26
permalink: /posts/2022/11/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - Politics
  - Violence
---
This is a blog post can also be read in my Blogger with full references. Please click [here](https://www.blogger.com/blog/posts/7261130877410299999?hl=en-GB&tab=jj)). This blog is written in Nov, 2022 when the Shanghai lockdown starting from April 2022 lasted for half of year and the anger and depression rised among Chinese people. I try to answer the question: Will the continued strict anti-Covid measures in China be more likely to lead to the large-scale social movement? 



Will the continued strict anti-Covid measures in China be more likely to lead to the large-scale social movement? (Unfinished)
======
Today - 26th Nov, collective actions and protests against the crazy Covid policy and even the regime have swept across my homeland, mainland China, and people, we Chinese bravely stand out in front of the repressive leviathan, loudly voice our anger and firmly fight for our right in the street. 
 
It has already been half of a year after the Shanghai lockdown in April 2022 when I drafted this blog. The anger and depression brought on by the Shanghai lockdown alongside my reading of The Power of Tiananmen by Dingxin Zhao motivated me to write a blog evaluating the possibility of the large-scale social movement in the context of the Shanghai lockdown by using the state-society relations as my analytical framework. At that time, I wrote this blog in a depressed and negative mood and disappointedly argued that large-scale social movement/collective action was impossible at that time because of the agreed perception of state legitimacy as a performance one in the mind of the top state leaders and the domestic population (majority). However, I also argued that large-scale social movement can be possible in the future if the state leaders give up their anchor on the performative legitimacy or if the Covid policy threatens and affects more people in China. 

Unfortunately, I only finished the introduction and theoretical part and did not finish my empirical part. Thus, at that time I did not choose to publish my blog publicly. Now after half of the year, on the one hand, it seems that nothing changes. The government in China still follows the non-Covid policy as strongly or even stronger as before. While the rest of the world has gone out of the shadow of the Covid, Chinese people still suffers from its unchanged policy and are like alien living on another planet. On the other hand, something changes. People come to the street, protest against this power abuse of the government, and fight for their deserved rights. The collective actions burst at least today. Those changed and unchanged make my blog written half of the year before still valuable. Firstly, the overall context of the strict Covid-policy in China does not change yet, which makes the context in this blog still relevant. Secondly, although the empirical context of more affected people and their perception of the legitimacy in the mind of both elite and the public may change, my analytical framework presented in the blog still provides a powerful space to analyze how those changing variables influence the large-scale social movement. Thus, in this case, my unfinished blog without the introduction and theoretical framework only can be still suitable for the new context and worth reading. 

Introduction
======

The global pandemic has already come to its third year. As most countries in the world have softened their anti-Covid strategies or even officially declared the "co-existence" with the Covid such as as the UK or Denmark, China has been on an opposite direction and still insisted its "Zero Covid" policy strictly. 

After its self-declaration of the victory over Covid and its commendation conference for national response to Covid-19 in Sep, 2020, the Covid and its implication have still affected the Chinese people in mainland and abroad. It includes the long-term control system such as "health code" and "flight restriction", and the repeated adaptation of anti-Covid “packages" of lockdown and mass testing in different cities with sporadic cases such as Xi'an, Jilin, and Ruili. Those have fuelled the dissatisfaction of the affected people and risen the sympathy from others. Sporadic criticism from Chinese can be observed both domestically and abroad (though domestic criticism has been regularly censored). The domestic criticism and sympathy that has been censored can be found in the website - China Digital Time that collects most censored online articles. Sources for the criticism from abroad are from some active Twitter accounts (most of them can be found in the following anti-China Twitter Account list made by Pengpai Xinwen). 

This criticism and dissatisfaction reach its apex after Shanghai the most "international" and prosperous city in China came into de facto lockdown and the humanitarian crisis has been frequently exposed under the disorderly city management. Through social media, the miserable situation in parts of Shanghai and other affected region has been spread faster and faster. The criticisms from so-called "anti-China" Twitter accounts have also become more active and received certain attention. Those dissatisfaction and sympathy have been stirred the conflict with the regime both online and in the real life. In the internet, the best example for this conflict is the spread of protest video - the Voices of Shanghai even after the strict government censorship. In the reality, there have many reports or videos on the conflict between Shanghai residents and regional authorities such as Resident Committee (居委会) and polices. Also, some residents who lack food and basic supply in Shanghai use the pot-banging as a way to protest against the strict lockdown measures. 

Despite the flood of dissatisfaction from affected residents in mainland and abroad Chinese and the sympathy from others, the CCP regime and Xi re-asserted the zero-Covid commitment and attacked its "doubters" in the the seven-member politburo standing committee (for country's senior officials) in 5th May (Chinese version). It informs the continued strict anti-Covid measures and the ignorance of the existing dissatisfaction from the affected people and intellectuals and sympathy from others. However, this hardline "zero policy" has been not effective in preventing the spread of Omicron as before. Also, scientists suggest that China still needs to booster the vaccination rates and reinforce its health-care system. This process, however, has been disrupted by its repeated lockdown and mass testing that consume a huge amount of medical resources. Thus, further spread of Omicron can be hard to control in the foreseeable future. More cities have already come to limited lockdown because of omicron such Beijing, and Zhengzhou. This informs that the dissatisfaction to the policy and conflict between the people and regime will continue or even increase. This leads to worries and questions - "What will happen next? or more specifically, will the continued strict anti-Covid measures in China be more likely to lead to (the large-scale) social movement"?

Using the state-society relation/state legitimacy as the analytical framework, this article tends to answer that 1) the agreed perception of state legitimacy as a performance one in the mind of the top state leaders and the domestic population (majority) makes the large-scale social movement less possible in the short term under the condition within which the criticism from some intellectuals (or some abroad Chinese) focuses more on the legal legitimacy and the criticism that points to the performance legitimacy only come from the affected domestic population (minority). 2) However, if the perception of state legitimacy in the mind of the top state elite continues changing from the performance one to an ideological and charismatic one, and further spread of omicron has affected more people's confidence in the performance legitimacy of the regime, the large-scale social movement is possible in the long run. 3) Also, stopping the current shift of state legitimacy and softening the strict anti-Covid measures can be the most effective means in avoiding the possible large-scale social movement and maintaining its performance legitimacy under the further spread of the omicron. 

In the following contents, A brief talking about the state legitimacy and how the gap of the perception of state legitimacy between state and different groups may lead to instability is firstly presented. Then, different perceptions of the state ligitimacy in the mind of top state elites, some intellectuals and oversea Chinese, and domestic population (including both affected and unaffected groups) are analysed along with the explanation about why this will not lead to the social movement currently. After that, two dangerous signals -  the shift of state legitimacy in the mind of the current top leader and high inflation-rate of the omicron are analysed as the key to spur the large-scale social movement. Finally, a suggestion of tackling this danger is provided. 

State Legitimacy and Social Movement
======

In social movement literatures, the lack of "legitimacy" of the regime has frequently used to explain the rise of the social movement (Habermas, 1975; Wolfe, 1977). State legitimacy to some extent confines the behaviour of the population, or state elites, and affect how people view others' behaviours. Thus, it determines when the population begins to feel grievance or dissatisfied and be against the regime, and what strategies that the regime will adopt to mitigate the prior dissatisfaction from the population are. Thus, in this article, the analysis of the possibility of the large-scale social movement will focus on the state legitimacy. 

However, by emphasising the state legitimacy as the main focus, this article does not presuppose a causal relationship between the loss of state legitimacy and the occurrence of the large-scale social movement. The occurrence of the large-scale social movement as a rare event has been determined by both systematic and chance factors (Jasper, 2010). For example, the repressive capacity of the state can be important factor in affecting the occurrence of the social movement. A high repressive regime will not provide any political opportunity for its people to initial a social movement even under the condition within which grievance is prevailing (Huntington, 1968). Other factors can be resource mobilisation capacity, spillover effect of the neighbouring instability, culture or identity, and et ac. Thus, this article has analysed the state legitimacy as a necessary condition of the social movement, rather than a sufficient condition. Also, throughout the article, any expressions that may imply a causal relationship are avoided. The loss of state legitimacy is necessary to the occurrence of the social movement and increase its likelihood. 

Although state legitimacy has been important in analysing the social movement, it is still a vague and sometimes abused concept. Some define the state legitimacy in a top-down way of the state capacity. For example, Lipset (1981: 64) has explained the legitimacy as "the system's capacity to maintain or engender the belief that the existing political institutions are the most suitable for the whole society". The similar focus can be detected in Linz (1988: 65)'s definition that "legitimacy is the belief that political institutions are better than others and can demand certain obedience from the people". Others explain it in a reverse way of focusing on people. They emphasise the legitimacy as "ultimately rooted in people's willingness to comply with state decisions" (Barrow, 1993: 25). 

However, those definitions share some common disadvantages. Firstly, as has been argued by Zhao (2000), those definitions of the state legitimacy fail to do the further clarification about which dimensions of the legitimacy and which groups of people have experienced this legitimacy loss. This makes the concept of the state legitimacy lack enough analytical ability and no more than a vague concept. Secondly,  by rooting in either top-down or down-top way, those definitions are static and ignore the interactive and relational nature of the state legitimacy. Different groups such majority population or state elites have different perceptions of the state legitimacy, and the conflictual interaction of their behaviours highly related to their perception of the state legitimacy can be the sources of the social movement. 

Thus, before analysing the current situation in China under the strict-Covid measures, the article firstly define the different dimensions of the state legitimacy, and the consequences of different combination of the perceptions of the state legitimacy from different groups. 

Analytical Framework
======

Dimensions of the state legitimacy used in this article have been drawn from the typology by Zhao (2000) and Weber (1978). By following Zhao's typology (2000: 22), there are three types of state legitimacy that is perceived by the state elites and different groups of people. They are ideological, legal-electoral, and performance legitimacy. A regime is based on the ideological legitimacy when its right to rule is built on a future promise of the grand vision. It is always accompanied by the ideology with set of ideas and values that justifies the objectives and action of the political system. The most typical example can be various communist regimes that aims to achieve the socialism and establish a communist society such Mao's China, Vietnam, and Cuba after the world war. Legal-electoral legitimacy refers to the situation within which the state takes the law as the final resort to bind all people including state elites themselves and the state leaders are elected on a regular election. Legal-electoral legitimacy has frequently been framed to be hand in hand with the democratic value, which makes it confused with the ideological legitimacy. To clearly differentiate it from the ideological legitimacy, the legal-electoral legitimacy here only emphasises the procedure aspect. By following it, the regime is justified by its regular leaders' election and the rule of law. Then, for performance legitimacy, it means that the state's right to rule is based on its economic and moral performance and capacity to build safer and more wealthy life. Also, as the complement, the charismatic legitimacy by Weber has been introduced to refer to an extreme dimension. In this dimension, the people bind themselves to the one or the few people and worship their personality and ability. As has been argued by Zhao (2000), this charismatic legitimacy can be intertwined with the ideological legitimacy. The most extreme version of the ideological legitimacy is always in the form of the charismatic legitimacy. For example, in the late Mao era of China, the whole country is built on a vision of communist society and the worship on Mao who has the final interpretation power of this vision. 

The large-scale social movement here is explained as being influenced by the result of different combination of the perceptions of the state legitimacy from different groups including majority people, intellectual, or state elites. Here the perception of the state elites and the majority have been seen as the most influential ones. Also, before presenting the analytical framework, this article recognises that, to gain the right of rule, the regime normally builds on the combination of more than one state legitimacy. Also, the perception of state legitimacy from groups can influence each other. For example, the shift of state legitimacy from ideological to performance for state elites lead to a similar shift in the majority in China after the cultural revolution. However, to keep the analytical precision and clarification, a simplification has been adopted. Thus, by emphaiszing the occurrence of the large-scale social movement as most likely influenced by the perception of state legitimacy by state elites and majority, the potential scenario for short-term analysis presents. 

(The Perception of State Legitimacy) 
Ideological (I);   Legal-Electoral (L);   Performance (P);   Charismatic (C)
                     by State Elites,       Majority,      Minority,       Result of the Large-scale Social Movement      
                              I or C        +      P     +      any       =         Most Likely
                              I or C        +      L     +      any       =         Most Likely
                              I or C        +  I or C    +      any       =         Least Likely
                                 P          +       L    +      any       =         Likely
                                 P          +       P    +      any       =         Less Likely
                                 P          +  I or C    +      any       =         Likely

In summary, the large-scale social movement in the short term is more likely when there exists the gap of the perception of state legitimacy between the state elite and majority. It is most likely when state elites believe the ideological or even charismatic one, but its majority does not, and is least likely when majority follows the ideological or charismatic one, too. Also, if state elites hold performance legitimacy, the occurrence of the large scale social movement can be less likely when the majority hold it too, and mitigate the alert level of social movement from the highest to the next when the majority holds different ones.  

The Perception of the State Legitimacy from Different Groups
======
Bearing the above analytical framework in the mind, this article examines the perceptions for different groups including intellectual and abroad Chinese, state elites, and domestic people. In this process, the perception of members within each group has been homogenised. I do not deny that there exists the variation of the perception of the member within the group. However, here I view the within-group members' perception of state legitimacy as following a "normal distribution" in stastistical term in which my labelled state legitimacy captures the "central tendency". 

Some Intellectuals and abroad Chinese
------
This group has been the vanguard in criticising the current anti-Covid measures and the regime itself online. Within this group, it can be divided into two different sub-groups. One is the radical intellectual or abroad Chinese with long history of immigration experience. The representative are dissents who were politically persecuted such as Wu'er Kaixi, Wang dan, or Cai Xia. They are professional or quasi-professional critics and dissents that devote themselves to be against the CCP regime. The contents of their criticism cover the every aspect of this regime including foreign policy or domestic policy beyond the Covid measures. The current strict anti-Covid measures that invoke the humanitarian crisis especially in Shanghai invites their more acute criticism and makes their previous or current criticism attract more audience. The second sub-group are some intellectual and abroad Chinese who hold relatively indifferent attitude to the regime (only compared to the first sub-group) or who seldom express their opinions publicly (given their strong domestic connection). The representative are abroad students. After the current anti-Covid measures and upcoming humanitarian crisis, the sympathy to affected people make them express their dissatisfaction more publicly and actively.

Here their perception of state legitimacy more concentrate on the legal-electoral one. By viewing the current regime as an arbitrary one that erodes the individual freedom and tramples on the rule of law, they believe that the legitimacy should root in the system in which regular election has been held to restrict the abuse of the power and the rule of law has been established as the final resort. By bearing this in mind, even during the 1990s when the China experienced the rapid economic development and certain political stability, their criticism especially for the first radical sub-groups did not stopped. Also, when the humanitarian crisis brought by the arbitrary and chaotic decision-making conforms to their long-term pessimism to the regime, their criticism comes to the top. 

However, their perception of state legitimacy as legal-electoral one fails to put noticeable influence on the large-scale movement given their population as the minority and some group characteristics. Those characteristics include their clear-cut pro-western attitude, elitism, and their intention to leave the country. Although they have strong presence in the social media (especially in Twitter), the status of those intellectuals and abroad students as minority cannot initiate any large-scale social movement by themselves. Only possibility for them to ignite an anti-government movement is to further encourage and utilize the grievance of the majority to the regime. However, this has been largely restricted by the gap of perception of the state legitimacy between them and majority who believe the performance legitimacy (it will be introduced more in the following parts). Furthermore, their own group characteristics can be huge barriers. Firstly, most of people in this group have never hidden their favour on the western values including democracy, freedom of speech, or election system, and some of them compared China with the west in an essentialized way, which simplifies them into a dichotomy of good or bad, modern or barbaric. Also, domestically, China official has frequently used the discourse of "the plot from foreign intervention" as the political excuse for their failure and similarly build another dichotomy of China and west. But, this one is inverse where the west has been viewed as enemy of China. With long-term propaganda, the domestic normally distrust the values in the clock of the west, especially for the essentilized western values favoured by those intellectuals. Secondly, this essentialized way of understanding also nourish an elitism among this group. They try to keep distance from the majority - the key force of the large-scale social movement, who are portrayed as inferior by them. This can reflect in the Twitter contents of some famous dissents such as Cai Xia or Fangzhouzi in which they usually frame China or domestic Chinese as "ignorant", "foolish” or "slavish". Thirdly, their intention to leave the country makes their criticism only at the rhetoric level and helps the regime reduce the danger of the social movement. This intention is very obvious in the second sub-groups. This can be reflected in the hot topic of "run study(润学)" among the young Chinese. It means the study of how to leave China and immigrate to other developed countries. Also, it has been observed that most young students who hold the most negative attitude to the regime are those who plan to migrate abroad. This intentions among them make the potential social movement lack the most important force, and render it less likely. 

Thus, for the intellectual and abroad students, their perception of the state legitimacy more concentrate on legal-electoral one. Also, given their minority status, and group characteristics, their effect on the potential social movement can be very limited. 

.... (unfinished)


